Okay, ready. I'm Wesley Morris and this
is Cannonball. Is it possible that I
have seen the best movie of 2025?
[Music]
Paul Thomas Anderson's got a new movie.
It's called One Battle After Another.
The premise is that Leonardo DiCaprio is
this washed up revolutionary, like a
leftist revolutionary. 15 years earlier,
he was bombing his way around LA. We
used to run around and do some real bad
[__] together. They got hurt. Now
they're coming after us.
>> And had a baby with another
revolutionary who's played by Tiana
Taylor.
>> [__] I felt like Tony Montana.
>> Two names never thought I was going to
say in a row next to each other. And now
like she's trying to eat his face. They
get separated. They're both in hiding.
But the government, the military, repped
by a ripped Sea Penn.
>> I'll be seeing you very soon.
>> They've never stopped looking for them.
Is this the best movie of the year? Is
it instantly Paul Thomas Anderson's best
movie? I'm gonna work this out with my
pal Shawn Fantasy, who loves himself
some PTA 2. Shawn hosts the Big Picture
Podcast with Amanda Dobbins and is the
Ringer's head of content. But today,
Shawn is my PTA co-conspirator and
co-celebrant. Sean, welcome to
Cannonball.
[Music]
Yes, we're here. And we're here for Paul
Thomas Anderson. So wonderful. Hi,
>> Wesley. Hi. I don't know if you and I
have ever talked about this. I feel like
I've mentioned this to you, but maybe
like a dozen years ago, I was talking to
I won't name who I was talking to, but I
was talking to a person who works in the
movie industry,
very very wellplaced within it. Um, a
filmmaker.
and he was telling me a story that he
had heard that every time Paul Thomas
Anderson wants to make a movie,
he goes to some studio and the studio or
the the executives talk to each other
and they're like, I got another Paul
Thomas Anderson script.
Is there any way I can trade you for for
something else? And the other person is
like, nah, dude. I just did a PTA.
Nobody doesn't want to not make one,
but making a lot of them because, you
know, they cost a lot, but they don't
make a lot, right?
>> Look, I I being a studio executive is a
tricky job. Like, I know I know
executives who were responsible for
becoming the studio that would make a
PTA movie, and they're really nice guys
who like movies, and they're usually
guys, for the record, but it's a
bottomline business, and they're
everyone's afraid to get fired. and
taking on a Paul Thomas Anderson movie
in the past could get you fired. It
doesn't matter how many Oscar
nominations you get. It doesn't matter
what Wesley Morris's review in the New
York Times says about the film. It's did
it make any money? That's how these
people are graded on their jobs. And
Paul Thomas Anderson's movies don't make
money. That's just a fact. It's they
mean they mean the world to me, but they
don't make any money. I I think Anderson
is very rare in this case where he is
kind of a great artist who everyone
agrees is among the best if not the very
best from his generation who's never
really had a money maker. you know, like
if you go down the list of his
contemporaries, if you look at um
Quentyn Tarantino or or David Fincher or
Stephen Soderberg,
um you know, Sophia Copala's movies
sometimes make more money than Paul
Thomas Anderson's movies. Like he just
has never had a big big big big winner.
And this is one that could change that
dynamic. But until now, it's not
surprising to hear you you recount that
story about the way that they were all
kind of passing him around like the uh
the you know toxic potato of Hollywood
geniuses. But
>> yeah, it's it's sort of like this might
be an interesting time to sort of think
about where this movie sits in in the in
the world of Paul Thomas Anderson. And
I, you know, I was thinking about like
what my three favorite um Paul Thomas
Anderson movies are.
>> If I had to rank them, I'd probably
start this way. I'd probably go um
>> hit me with it. Come on, do it. Just go
the band. The Master, there Will Be
Blood,
>> um Inherent Vice.
>> Those are my Those are my three.
>> Those all came together, right? Those
three were released consecutively.
>> Yep.
>> So, we're close. We match on two out of
three. Right now I think my number three
would be Phantom Thread. My number two
would be The Master. My number one would
be There Will Be Blood. Now that can
change.
>> Of course it can. I'm not Don't put
that. Don't etch that in stone from me.
>> I look at There Will Be Blood and I'm
like masterpiece, right? Masterwork. and
you know the perfect actor, the perfect
setting, the perfect, you know, a guy
who is of California telling the story
of California's power in such a discreet
way. Like just a genius perfect movie,
right?
>> But like, am I bored of myself for
having that opinion? A little bit.
>> A little bit. But but but listen,
you sit down with There Will Be Blood
and just those first five minutes that
are just pure darkness
and this is somebody birthing something
into the light by digging down. You
don't even know what you're watching, by
the way. You have no idea what this
sound is. You have no idea what the
image is going to turn out to be. And
you're watching Oh my god. Like, or we
should just watch some of it.
>> Yeah. There's the pickaxe and the
sparking in the in the granite tunnel.
The Sisophian act of trying to make
one's own future in this terrible
country. Come on. The metaphor it leaps
out at you 30 seconds.
>> It's not terrible. I mean, it will not
be terrible for him. He is terror,
right? Like this is like the devil
climbing up to earth essentially, right?
>> This is what we're watching. We're
watching the devil birth himself,
>> you know? He's basically digging for,
you know, the stuff.
>> He's looking for gold. He's looking for
gold. He's looking for gold and he
stumbles upon the gold of the 20th
century. I mean, that's the whole idea,
right? Is that it's a the transition,
>> the black gold.
>> The black gold. Yeah. It's a transition
from one industrial era of this country
to another. and the way in which that
power was seized and controlled and uh
in the form of Daniel Plainview who is
evil but also a person that we really
come to understand in a very broken way.
>> It just is is a bold biblical act here
and I think about it all the time when I
think about a movie's great opening
minutes. But I think the thing that
makes it like a very
interesting and and and characteristic
Paul Thomas Anderson scene is that you
could never have predicted it. It has no
antecedent. You don't know exactly why
you're watching it and you don't know
where it's going to take you. Mhm.
>> Is there like a sort of characteristic
Paul Thomas Anderson trait
characteristic that like like seems that
you can locate in a sequence or a scene
in a movie?
>> I I want to talk about something that's
not in my top three. And this is a light
bulb moment over my head scene in my
lifetime.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Which is the New Year's Eve party on
December 31st, 1979 in Boogie Nights.
One of the most stressful sequences.
>> It's up there.
>> Okay.
>> It It starts, I think, at 11:57 p.m. And
little Bill, who's played by William H.
Macy, is wandering through this house
looking for his wife. You can hear this
Charles Wright song playing called Do
Your Thing, which starts out like a
traditional kind of 70s funk song and
over time transforms into this very,
very erratic, exciting guitar breakdown.
And little Bill finds his wife and she's
doing something he doesn't want her to
be doing. Poor little Bill, by the way.
And now listen to the song as it's
concluding. this kind of guitar freak
out
and then he blows his brains out on the
last note of the song.
>> There's one thing about this scene that
obviously immediately stands out as
being classic Paul Thomas Anderson and
it's not the single take. It's the it's
the soundtrack. It's the use of music. I
mean, it's just virtuosic. His
understanding of both music as as
performed by musicians and music as
given to you by great actors, right? I
think PTA is very good at blending the
obscurantist
unusual needle drop with the hammerhead.
>> This is so obvious. It's perfect. And
this movie, this new movie concludes
with with with Tom Petty's American
Girl.
>> Yes.
>> And it's it's the most on then yet
exhilarating way to conclude this movie.
>> Think about who the American Girl is
now, right?
>> Exact. And who is it? It's not maybe not
who Tom was thinking of, but it is who
Paul is thinking of. And it's just it's
it's an ingenious little stroke to
conclude the movie.
>> Um, what else about this scene is is
interesting to you? I mean, cuz it like
there's the violence of it.
>> Mhm.
>> Um,
there's kind of a I mean, it's kind of
funny until you know that not to laugh
anymore.
>> That's what it is. I mean, we've because
we've already seen little Bill get it
get get humiliated and played for
laughs. But Macy,
>> who is a very um gestural actor who kind
of moves his hands and his body, think
of him in Fargo and the way that he's
kind of stammering and
>> he's stuck still in his performance here
when he goes out to get the gun in the
car. He doesn't move. He doesn't react.
He doesn't react to the gunshots.
um he is distraught and he has decided
that it's over and
PT is like in his mid20s when he's
making this movie you know like he
understands something about people about
broken people
>> that I find I I I still find
>> so exciting and so
uh rare and this is like a very a movie
about sex and bodies and that's not
there not a lot of movies about that.
No, you mean like you're talking about
boogie nights or you're talking about
one one battle after another? Yes.
Because
>> both all all of the movies?
>> Yes. I mean like the ways in which like
these relationships are break. Okay.
Wait, hold on. I actually would like to
think more about Paul Thomas Anderson
and where one battle after another goes
in the scheme of him. Um, and like maybe
even where it goes in the scheme of
maybe like the last, I don't know, some
some other phase of American movies
because he's operating at a level that
there aren't very many other people even
trying to at the moment. Uh, I'm going
to confess something to you.
>> Okay.
>> I I was not looking forward to seeing
this movie.
>> Oh, no.
Um, well,
I think it's uh it's a couple things.
One, I might have masterpiece fatigue.
He's made at least three and I'm okay. I
did not love licorice pizza. I thought,
okay, well, he's now at a point where
he's just going to
just be happy to be making movies, but
maybe he said everything and he's
achieved um
his ambitions. They've been met already.
But setting that aside, I was also kind
of miffed by because the way I
experienced this movie even existing was
through the through the ads. I saw a
trailer before one movie uh and I saw
the poster and on the poster there's a
giant Leonard Leonardo DiCaprio head and
I just thought you know what
godamn you movie industry you're putting
all your hopes or a lot of your hopes
you know on this movie to make some
money because that's where we are now an
industry that didn't care about Paul
Thomas Anderson as a as a as an
industrial concern is now turning him
into one and teaming him with this with
this like you know very still bankable
movie star and I just was like I don't
know what kind of compromises had to be
made to pull this off. Um and then I
went and I was wrong. It's a great
movie. Um
>> it's an exceptional movie.
>> Like what were you like how were you
feeling before you got to the movie
theater?
always trepidacious whenever someone
that you love is taking a big risk, you
know. Okay. And he's a a filmmaker I
just have a very big emotional
relationship with.
>> Yes.
>> And every movie is an event for me when
he makes one. But he's never made
anything like this before. He's never
made a $150 million movie with the
biggest star in the world that is an
action film. And forget about all of the
realworld reflections and consequences
that are depicted. I wasn't even sure
how much of that would make its way into
this movie.
>> Yeah, I didn't know that either.
>> So once you know that too, sure it's a
it's a little bit tremor making if
you're a big fan of someone like this.
And yet he's never really disappointed
me. You know, we can talk about which
ones we like the most and which ones we
think are the least successful, but I
Paul Thomas Anderson doesn't have any
bad movies. So I wasn't like actually
nervous. I just want this to work
because it would be so great for
everything that I believe in for this
movie to work. Okay.
>> And here we are and it worked.
>> So what I mean when you're talking about
like what you believe in, what is that
what does that entail?
>> I think that film making and movies are
an art form and also the most
interesting mass cultural enterprise
that America's ever created. And so like
you take the person who's the best at
making movies and you take the person
who is the best at selling movies with
his face and you smash them together and
then it just so happens that they've
made something that is exactly about the
modern condition and the world that we
live in. And it's like a it's a magical
stew. It's an unusual it's an unlikely
thing to happen and it happens very
rarely in this thing that you and I have
been thinking about and talking about
and writing about for so many years. Um,
well, we should talk about like what
actually is happening in this movie. I I
I think that the first half hour of this
thing, I mean, classic Paul Thomas
Anderson form, he he blasts out of the
gate,
>> just when you think you got a handle on
things.
>> And this might be the best starting bell
um of all 10 movies. This is his 10th
film. We should say he's 55 years old. I
would say he's probably at his
directorial peak in some way. Um
>> he knows the most he's gonna know. Yeah.
>> Yeah. But this one, it just comes out of
the gate real hot. Um it's 2010, you
know. Uh these would be in in in our
world the Obama years. But this movie is
also kind of identifying the the
constancy and chronicness of the
assorted crisis. So it doesn't matter
really in some ways who the president is
because these problems have always been
here. And you know at some point we're
like at the US Mexico border and
you know the government just feels like
it it just feels like there's a there's
a war on and the war is against the
people. The people are this set of
people are at war with the government
and it just feels like you are like very
alongside these leftists as you know
there's a migrant detention center and
they are
basically raiding the migrant detention
center to liberate the people who are
there. Um, and it's just quite clear in
this tense, stressful, chaotic
atmosphere that the leftists,
they are not [__] around. They mean
every single thing they do here.
>> Justice to the vigilante group known as
the French 75.
>> You know, in that first 30 minutes,
you're getting all these characters.
You're getting the members of this
terrorist organization. You're learning
the the the people in the government
outfit that we need to pay attention to.
Primarily played by Shawn Penn. Uh whose
character's name is is is it Lieutenant
General Captain Steven Lockjaw?
>> I think it's Colonel.
>> Colonel.
>> Colonel. I named them all but the right
one. Colonel. Colonel Steven Lockjaw. Um
what a what a great name. And the Sean
Penn does not need method acting to know
what to do with a character named Steven
Lava. His posture alone is locked jaw
for sure.
>> This is the first time I understand what
it means to use a phrase like that. Um,
and I I don't know. I just found the
energy of this thing exciting. I also
like that for those first 30 minutes,
Leonardo DiCaprio is kind of an
afterthought and the dominant presence
is Tiana Taylor who is like cut from a
diamond and is just such a strong
physical
dynamic charismatic presence. You are
completely magnetized by her. Um, I was
jealous of anybody who had never seen
her before because they would go to this
movie and will be experiencing her for
the first time. Those cheekbones, those
lips, and I don't know. I just like did
you like you're watching this happen and
you're seeing you're seeing her take
over this movie or like I don't even not
even take it over. It's her movie for
for 30 minutes.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean the the thing that
struck me the first time that I saw it
was not just the attention that is
focused on her character and how she is
very much the engine of the movie for
the first 45 minutes or so, but there's
a moment shortly after they pull off
this kind of raid liberation on that
migrant detention center that you were
referring to and they get in the car
together and she begins to embrace
DiCaprio ghetto, her ghetto pat.
>> Mhm. And the way that she kisses him,
>> oh my god,
>> open mouthed, tongue out.
>> It's like she's treating him like a like
a scoop of ice cream.
>> I mean,
>> and it's it's so physical. And the, you
know, to encourage her to do that or if
that was her choice to see her with that
kind of physical power, both holding a
gun and also holding
>> eating DiCaprio's face. Yes.
>> That's that was that's an announcement
of what kind of a movie this is. And I
was I found it thrilling. I mean, Tiana
Taylor is somebody like I I used to
write about music. I've followed her
career as an R&B artist over the years,
I think. I think I assigned a profile of
her in Vibe magazine in like 2008. She's
been around for a long time. She's
wonderful in 2001, AB Rockwell's movie
from a couple of years ago. She's a good
actor,
>> but this is easily the most high-profile
thing that she's done. And she, you're
right, she owns this movie for a
stretch. And a militant black woman
owning a movie from Warner Brothers in
2025 is that's that's a big deal. That's
not not that's not something to be
overlooked.
>> Uh, no. And I also think that there's
like a correspondent
historical dimension to this too, right?
I mean, this is a person Paul Thomas
Anderson who knows the history of the
movies. Um, his his favorite
aesthetically his favorite decade to
draw from is the 1970s, a period during
which, you know, that includes the black
black exploitation era. and he would
have seen this, you know, the great
movies that would feature people like
Pam Greer and Tamara Dobson and perhaps
wonder, as I have many a time, where's
the beef? Like, you've got these great
women in these movies and all they're
doing is being mannequins. And you know,
the rarity of of and the scarcity of
roles for for black women during that
period is kind of what makes someone
like Pam Greer or Tamar Doson and like
it makes them iconic. But then you watch
the movies and it's really like like Pam
Greer like throwing women over tables
and you know she's got a few lines. But
the question that this movie kind of
answers in some way is what would it
look like for the radical politics of of
an era like that to find a narrative
engine, right? And to have those women
who were clear in clear control of the
plots of those movies actually have
politics to match them while also not,
you know, skimping on the sexuality that
that, you know, at least this character
is committed to in the movie commits to
it and the ways in which white men in
particular respond to her. Because what
this is is a love triangle in in the
most generic possible description of
this between DiCaprio
and Shawn Penn's character
who discovers her planting a bomb
uh and is like, "But you know, I'll let
you go, ma'am, if you uh
you know, you you uh you service me a
little bit." And she's like, "Hm, let me
think about that." Well, the movie is in
clearly very heavily inspired by Thomas
Pinchin's Vinand, which is a novel set
during the 1980s, very much about the
sort of aftermath of 1960s radicals and
how they kind of either reintegrate or
have struggled to reintegrate into
society
>> during the era. During the era, right?
The movie though, the portrayal of Tiana
Taylor's character is very interesting
because this is not what you might
expect from a movie right now, which is
that this is a person of pure leftist
virtue, right? And that it's like it's
politics all the way down and her
beliefs driving action. She's much more
nuanced than that. And so I think that
there's a way to look at her and say
this is a rat. This is a person who's
selfish and the movie is tangling with
this idea of is she actually attracted
to Steven Lock Jaw? Is she actually more
about saving herself than the movement
or her family? Like confronting you.
Yeah, there's not. It's forcing you to
think about it, right? Which is very
unusual with right now. We would think
if you would put someone as strong and
as powerful seeming as Tiana Taylor in a
movie in a role where she's the change
agent that she should be the hero and
she's not the hero of the movie.
>> I don't think this movie has any heroes
really at all. Um I think the the the
point at which the movie pivots is her
relationship with this with this
colonel, right? this highly improbable
like only o this is how you know the
source material is Thomas Pinchin
because only in the world of the man who
wrote Gravity's rainbow and
and uh you know the crying of lot 49
could you get something like a like you
know in the world of Anderson's movie a
black radical leftist who was also not
above having a good time strategic
physically, I might say, with, you know,
the the head uh figure that's going to
represent the military throughout this
movie. Um, who's played by Shawn Penn,
who is in full Popeye mode here. Um,
like he is like a walking Charlie horse
who, you know, because because Paul
Thomas Anderson really has a Robert
Alman, you know, one of his one of his
icons here. Um, and the a person he has
channeled throughout his work is is
Robert Alman, who's, you know, one of
his most notorious outings as a
filmmaker is this musical, this live
musical version of Popeye. Um, a well
from which he has taken many a drink
throughout, you know, his career. And I
just feel like this version of Shawn
Penn in this film who is just all muscle
and has, you know, something like the
Popeye haircut when the hat is off. Um,
it's just it's like not a joke.
>> It it's easy to forget in the last 10
years or so what Shawn Penn meant to
movie acting culture.
>> Mhm.
>> And that he he occupied a very rare
status that included people like Marlon
Brando and Daniel Day Lewis, these sort
of commanders of screen. And because of
some maybe some of the choices that he's
made as an actor or whatever details we
learned about his personal life, we
forgot a little bit and
>> well, he let us forget because the roles
weren't there anymore.
>> He did. You know, Paul has always said
that he's always wanted to write a big
part for Penn and that this is this was
their chance to finally come together
and do something
and it is among his best performances.
And this is a guy who has two Academy
Awards and he is uh it's a weird movie
where the two most powerful people in
the movie are not Leonardo DiCaprio in
the Leonardo DiCaprio movie and maybe
not even the third. Maybe Benio Del Toro
is the third. Yeah.
>> So, you know, this is a this is a really
like a spring-loaded explosion of
heavyweight performances that are going
in the movie. And Penn also because of
his like his own personal radical
politics that also have gotten kind of
increasingly blurry in the last 10
years. It's like, is he like a lock jaw
type now or is he somewhere all the way
on the other side? Like the movie is
kind of like poking you with all these
provocations based on what we know about
these people in real life, too, which is
only something kind of magical that you
can do in casting.
>> It's probably useful to just talk about
like what happens in the middle of this
movie um with respect to
just what the tide of the plot is doing.
And you know, we wind up 15 years later
We haven't even said what Tiana Tiana
Taylor's character's name is, by the
way.
>> Um, it's uh what is it? Perfidia.
Perfidia Beverly Hills.
>> I mean, that is if she's not taking
Patty Hurst away from daddy, I don't
know who is. And you know, she's off
somewhere else. We're 15 years into the
future. And Leonardo DiCaprio is no
longer, you know, the explosives expert.
He looks like he's been blown up. He's
just sitting around not really doing
anything, raising this 15-year-old
daughter of his who is now played by
Chase Infinity. And you know, I mean,
we're we hear increasingly aware of the
of the stakes of the entire situation,
which is that the government is has not
stopped looking for this for this
DiCaprio character whose name now is
Bob. um who's living a regular
schmegular life in what we come to learn
is a sanctuary city. You know, his
daughter Willa is now taking, you know,
she's a student. She's a high school
student and all the stuff that comes
with that is turns out to be pretty
funny and she's taking these karate
lessons. Um, and you know, at some point
the government figures out where they
are, comes to try to find them, takes
Willa, and Bob now has to spring into
action to try to get her back, and winds
up the only person he can think to turn
to
is Willis, karate instructor, who is
played by Bonichio Del Toro, who is
wonderful and, you know, wonderfully
zen, I should say. And for a while, the
two of them are kind of on this
adventure um to get him closer to the
daughter. And what this means for
DiCaprio is he's got to remember all of
his old leftist radical tendencies that
he hasn't had any contact with in 15
years. And it's such beautiful comedy.
this guy like this stoned,
couchbound,
broed guy like figuring out like what
even the the code for the meetup point
is which is a recurring motif in the
film. He's calling this number.
>> Hi, what's up? What's up, homie? It's uh
it's me again, Bob Ferguson. And the
person on the other end of this of this
activist, you know, this leftist hotline
is like, "Sir, what's the code?"
>> Uh, I think we got off on the wrong
foot. I was trying to get the rendevous
point for my daughter, Willow.
>> If if you can't answer what time is it,
I cannot give you the rendevous point.
This is a key tenant of the rebellion.
I'm surprised you can't name it.
>> And he's like, I don't know the code.
>> Just let me in, man. I tell you, I can
tell you everything else.
>> And it's like I've killed my brain for
15 years with alcohol and drugs.
>> I'm a drug and alcohol lover. And I
cannot remember for the life of me or
the life of my only child the answer to
your question. What time is it? And the
comedy and the scheme of this movie like
the hold music is the revolution will
not be televised. It is just
>> it's not afraid to laugh at the things
that can be funny and knows enough and
trusts us enough to know what what is
truly terrifying about our current
circumstances. But there's something
about the the bumbling
nature of the DiCaprio character
as he's moving through all these grave
circumstances and not quite having it
not quite register like the gravity of
it is not occurring to him and he is
frequently told to like or forced to
observe
um
what the stakes actually are beyond him
and his family. And there's a scene like
my favorite scene in the movie where
DiCaprio turns to Del Toro to help help
him get on the path of figuring out what
happened to his to his daughter.
>> I need you, brother. Please. Sensei.
Sensei. Sensei. Please.
>> Courage. Bob. Courage. That's it.
Courage. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Hey,
thank you, sensei. Thank you, sensei.
Thank you. God damn it. Revolution.
>> It's one of the moments the movie is at
its like most tense. And Del Toro knows
that this siege is happening on the town
that he where where he's keeping these
these people who've crossed the border
into the US and he's been hiding them in
his house for, you know, who knows how
long, but they're they're a part of this
community that he has built in this in
this building. And once you get there,
there's a moment where he DiCaprio's
freaking out.
>> I need a weapon, man. All you got is
goddamn nunchucks. You know where I can
get a gun?
>> Wow.
>> Cool out. Ocean waves.
>> And he's just like, you know, I don't
know what I'm going to do. I'm I mean,
he's loud. He's screaming. And Del Toro
turns to him. He may even turn to him.
He just says to him at some point, "Hey,
don't be selfish." Um, or is that the
line? Hold on. Let me get it right. Um,
he says, "Don't get selfish to to
Lonardo DiCaprio." And he's taking him
up through the apartment cuz he's going
to stash him for a minute. He's going to
give him a place to stay while they
figure out what to do. And DiCaprio is
like, "We got to go get to where you're
going to stash me." And Del Toro is
like, "Wait a minute
here. This is this is this you're
passing all of these people who live in
this apartment." And Del Toro in the
camera. Stop it. each one of these
people and he names them and introduces
us to them and they just kind of look
up. They're just like doing whatever
they were doing in the apartment, you
know, eating, playing a game, I don't
know, talking. And I can't tell you how
moving and beautiful a moment that is in
the middle of this extremely stressful
situation that this movie has remembered
what normally would happen here, which
is this is a literal pass through on the
way to something more important. But for
this these 90 seconds, this is the most
important thing. White man, you are
going to you're going to know the names
of each one of these people and and then
we're going to we're going to solve your
problem. But you just need to know these
people have problems, too. And
>> it's the it's the flip side of the
radical politics that we see in the
first 45 minutes. It's the it's the same
sense of
curing injustice but doing it in a
completely different way that it is like
it is human decency, compassion and
personal relationship as opposed to
direct action and um violent conflict.
And the movie is not saying this one's
better than the other, but it's saying
this is two sides then and they're
they're interwoven.
>> They're interwoven. And Sensei is trying
to make Bob remember like what's at the
core of what the movement is supposed to
represent just by being himself and just
by being in his community at this
incredibly stressful moment. Now I will
say the first time I saw the movie that
scene you're describing I was like get
on with it. Like I I I need this guy to
plug his phone in so he can call someone
so he can get his daughter. And so the
movie, it never lets go of the urgency
that Bob has during that scene, even
though it is showing us Sensei's
incredible patience and decency and
desire to situate Bob inside of the
community that like he's obviously a
leader of. This is again like very
nuanced stuff in the middle of a chase
action movie,
>> right? But it's like you okay, you want
to talk about family separation? I'll
show you some family separation,
[__] Just just just look down
this hallway. These people are are
facing the same [__] that I'm about to
help you deal with. To me, you are just
another migrant.
>> It's totally true.
>> So, you calm down. I'll
>> living under a false name. Exactly.
>> I'm helping you, but just chill. Um,
>> so I saw the first time I saw the movie,
I saw it at the DGA and Stephen
Spielberg interviewed Paul Thomas
Anderson after the movie and they talked
about this aspect of the movie a little
bit and what Stephen Spielberg asked
about was kind of Benio's energy
>> and PTA said that
>> it was very important for Benio to not
be infected by what Leonardo DiCaprio
was doing as an actor, which is
incredibly nervy and jangly and and
loose and kind of moving all over the
place. And Benio said, "Stop me only if
you feel me absorbing what he's doing,
cuz I want to be still."
>> Yeah.
>> I want to be calm. And I I do want to
talk to you about Leo because you are
the the the master of understanding
actor and actor career arcs, but he's in
this mold right now, this wave of
performances. Once Upon a Time in
Hollywood, Don't Look Up. Um certainly
this film where the kind of nervous
>> oh the flower drama killers of the moon
killers of the flower moon as well. You
know like all of these guys are all
funny
>> but also sort of pathetic and tragic
>> and this being how he is turning 50
>> is so interesting that this is the kind
of character that he is drawn to at this
stage of his life.
>> He's he he has heroic moments in this
movie but he's not the hero. He's not
the hero. And the heroic moments again
are they just they're accidents, right?
Like there's a sequence where he's
running across the roof like running
across this rooftop with these three
Mexican kids and they're like cool
skateboard kids, right? And like they're
like three, you know, like like a mile
ahead of him and he's just trying to
keep up in his bathrobe and his ponytail
and his unwa unwashed ponytail and the
sunglasses. And these kids are just it's
night time. This is a beautifully
photographed sequence. Looks great in 70
millimeter IMAX. And the kids, you're
not sure what it's shot just ambiguously
enough in the dark so that you don't
exactly know where they're leaping to,
what the stakes are up on these roofs,
but surely they're not all connected cuz
we're not in Philadelphia or New York.
And sure enough, these kids keep running
and DiCaprio is like running and all of
a sudden he realizes he's out of roof
and he just falls
through a tree.
>> He just falls through a tree.
>> It's such a great The laugh got choked
in my throat when it happens. You know,
you're so concerned for him, but it's so
funny.
>> It's it's it's pure Looney Tunes. It's
actually pure Looney Tunes with with
stakes because it's a little bit like
you're still laughing and like the
minute he hits the ground and tries to
get up, he is tased and seized. I don't
know. I think that it's there's
something about the way he is using Paul
Thomas Anderson is using DiCaprio as as
a movie star, right? He's the he's the
bait that gets switched, right? Um you
you come for that giant poster head and
you get a movie about Tiana Taylor and
Chase Infinity. Yes. And that carries
through the movie. But what the movie
reveals
is that what certainly what Thomas
Pinchin thinks and I think what we
sometimes think and may actually be true
is that the world is organized, divided
and run by secret societies. And on one
side there are these leftists who have
this hotline and have this code of
ethics and have this interconnected
network that exists across at least 15
years that we see. And on the other
side, we have these figures, the
Christmas adventurers, who get the the
problem of the movie into action, which
is they invite Lock Jaw to be a part of
their society. And that triggers Lock
Jaw remembering the potentiality of a
problem that he needs to solve
>> in the form of Willa and Bob Ferguson.
Right.
>> And that's why the government comes
>> DiCaprio DiCaprio and his and his
daughter played by Chase Infinity.
>> Exactly. And the these are all uh
secretive environments where big action,
meaningful life stakes action is
happening. And most people don't would
never know that it exists. In the case
of the Christmas adventurers, it's the
most skull and crossbones thing you
could possibly imagine. And the whole
movie is organized around the fact that
this is all happening under our noses,
you know, which is just such a clever
idea that is so modern.
>> I would like to sit with this Christmas
adventurer situation for one second.
Sure.
>> You know, it is definitely a like
Knights of the Brotherhood of hanging
black people and killing killing
Latinos. Um, denouncing the American
Indian experience and, you know, who
knows what else. Um, but the I thank you
for reminding me of this whole other
plot strand and connecting it to the
thing we've been talking about, which is
that Shawn Penn's character really
really really his ultimate mega dream is
to become a Christmas adventurer aka,
you know, a KKK member,
>> but of a of a high or very No, these
people don't wear sheets. They wear
their own faces, but they meet in in you
know this one of the lead motifs of this
movie is tunnels, right? Tunnels and
caverns and backrooms.
>> And one of the great sequences in this
film is the first time that the Shaun
Penn character meets the Christmas
adventurers. the background for the for
this for this encounter. It features
Tony Goldwin, which you know, I did not
know Paul Thomas Anderson watched a lot
of television, although it stands to
reason he is married to one of our great
television uh personalities in Maya
Rudolph. Um personalities like like
artists. Um but he has definitely seen
some scandal and knows the power of
having Tony Goldwin represent anything
official. And the idea that this guy is
also one of these people,
>> he's a comic figure playing a deeply
malevolent secret society member. This
is the kind of mischievous stuff that
Paul Thomas Anderson does that other
filmmakers do not do. You know, Tony
Goldwin, you might say, "Oh, this is the
guy from Scandal or this is also the guy
from Ghost." You know, this is this is
one of the key movie villains of the
last 40 years.
>> The great one of the great movie
villains. Yes. Yes. Well, I mean, key
key is key is maybe the better word to
put it or, you know, better way to put
it. Um, I I think that like the just to
stick with this scene for a second,
there's something so um I don't know,
suspenseful, a little scary. I mean, it
this these scenes with the Christmas
adventurers especially are like tapping
into this kind of dread. Um, in part
because all you're all you're really
hearing in those sequences besides
dialogue is air, right? You can just
hear atmosphere and underneath that that
atmosphere is just a very
persistent and and you know somewhat
simple
music that Johnny Greenwood has done and
and a frequent Paul Thomas Anderson
score composer. Part of the reason a
huge part of the of the atmosphere in in
his other movies comes from Johnny
Greenwood. And it's really effective in
this movie because it's just kind of
moving you along, right? I think it's
just this tapping almost clocklike
metronomic sound that occurs from most
of the movies runtime. There are some
strings and there are some other um
instruments, but a lot of the driving
force of the score is percussive.
>> Yeah, you get a little bit of the David
Sh, Michael Small '7s kind of piano,
these like isolated piano notes that are
meant to just kind of drive like a sense
of conspiracy around us.
>> Anyway, I just I love that sequence. Um,
in part because it is it is it is
terrifying
uh for its intimacy, but also for I also
love it because it he finds Paul Thomas
Anderson finds these ways to inflict
comedy on it. Anyway, I was just
thinking about like this is the first
movie he's made that's set in the
present in 22 years, 23 years. a Punch
Drunk Love is the last time he worked in
a contemporary period. And I think a lot
about what it means when directors,
especially especially white directors,
like hang out in the past. Um, and you
know, what it is they're looking for,
what it is they're hiding from. Um,
>> I know what it is for in part for Paul
Thomas Anderson.
>> Okay.
>> Cell phones,
>> smartphones, Smartphones for most
filmmakers, let's set aside maybe Park
Chan Wuk are tremendously uncinematic
and the experience of being alive right
now is being attached to a device and
often not making eye contact with those
you are with because you are looking at
the device and film making is a head-up
medium. You need to be connecting with
the camera,
>> right? And if you watch this movie, even
though you know it's in 2025,
these are ancient phones that people are
using. They are talking on the phone a
lot. They are not looking at their phone
a lot.
>> Right. Right.
>> And I I find that to be very very
notable
in terms of PTA deciding to finally make
a contemporary set movie.
>> Yeah. But the reason I'm bringing this
up in terms of thinking about what this
movie is about and what it's trying to
do is that I feel like this is a person
either because of his household or
because you know he lives he has lived
in that city of Los Angeles his entire
life and you live in Los Angeles.
It seems impossible to me that if you're
an artist and you make things and you
live in Los Angeles, it seems very
difficult to live there and see what's
happening and not want to try to find a
way to have your art respond to it. Even
if you fail, even if you wind up making
a perfectly on then obvious movie,
you've at least said something and put
on the record what is happening in this
country and specifically if you live in
Los Angeles in Los Angeles. And this to
me feels like a guy who couldn't take it
anymore. This movie is such an
incrimination of so many other people
who make things and claim to care about,
you know, people, humanity, this
country, whatever.
Because you know when people do it, they
do it as an allegory. They do it, you
know, this is a movie about
this country and nobody's wearing a
cape, right? There are no heroes. Um the
right the right thing is seldom done in
it and the wrong things are
catastrophically cataclysmically wrong.
They are wronger than any single
individual action. This is a system
crushing people. Um, and I just feel
like
this is probably the only one of these
we're gonna get this year at this level.
And I think it is a real
dare to his peers and I mean like his
immediate cohort of filmmakers to to do
something and say something.
>> I do I I have paired this movie in my
mind with Edington quite a bit.
>> Um,
>> yeah Arers Edington. Yes,
>> another contemporary thriller set during
the pandemic. It does not work.
>> I really like it. Um I I it didn't work
for audiences obviously because no one
went to go see it. But um I think that
that is a that's a movie that is I I
think
>> sincerely trying to grapple with a
feeling. Mhm.
>> But what it what it ultimately does not
have that this movie has is that this
movie is shot through the prism of a
family dynamic.
>> Mhm. Mhm. There is there are parents who
have concern for their kids in Edington,
but this movie the entire emotional
relationship to the movie will hinge on
how you feel about Profidia and and Pat
and then Bob and Willa and and and in
some ways Lock Jaw and Willa as well.
And that is what Hollywood is best at.
It is confronting you with the realities
of our world artistically through drama.
You use the word melodrama in your
introduction about the movie.
>> Yes.
>> And this is a melodrama. This is a story
that you get caught up in. You want to
know what happens.
>> But if you stop for one minute to think
about what he's trying to say, I don't
think what he's trying to say is
clearcut.
>> No,
>> I don't think it's it's not
messagebound, right?
>> That's not that's an unanswerable
question.
>> It's a little bit thornier than that.
And it is much more relationship
focused, but the circumstances of the
story are undeniably about contemporary
times and maybe even all times just in
terms of how power works, how people get
the things that they want, what happens
as you get older and your relationship
to the world changes. I find all of
these things incredibly resonant for me.
And the other thing that I really like
about the movie as a longtime fan of his
is I feel like he has three phases as a
filmmaker. One is this whirling dervish
shot out of a cannon kid who's watched
every Scorsesei movie and is like I know
I got all the moves
>> and he's I'm putting all the moves on
screen. I'm 26 and I'm putting all the
moves on screen.
>> Second phase is retreat retrenchment
trying to figure out what's really
inside him and what he really wants to
say. It starts with punch drunk love
after the quote unquote failure of
Magnolia and then the master and there
will be blood twin together as like
explorations of the male psyche.
And then the third phase is about
intimacy.
>> Mhm.
>> Phantom Thread, Licorice Pizza, Inherent
Vice. These are movies about
damaged relationships and damaged
people. And this movie is about those
things too, right? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
Yes. interpersonally, nationally,
politically, um, spiritually.
>> And does this new movie is it is it as
you asked, is it his crowning
achievement? I think it's going to be
interesting to watch how the world
receives it. There's obviously a
narrative that this is going to be the
its time moment for him with the
Academy.
>> Mhm.
>> There's
interesting potential commercially. It's
a movie that satisfies in a unique way.
It's not as mysterious as some of his
best work. And I think that's for a
reason in some way. I think that like I
think this is a person who has just
decided that he's he's he doesn't need a
bag of tricks here. Like he doesn't need
the surrealism. He doesn't need the
magic realism. He doesn't need the the
mystique because you know part of the
problem with the way the American story
gets told is nobody is really very
explicit about what happened, right? and
these relationships stand in for a piece
of a hole. We haven't even talked about
there's a there's a like Native American
tracker in this movie who has a very
important function, right? Um, this is a
movie that really understands the whole
of the story and like the whole of the
story in terms of, you know, it being
centuries old and in terms of it
changing every minute in 2025.
Um, and I don't know what what a frog
bath would get you here. I'm sure he
could have figured out a way to do it,
but I think it says a lot that he didn't
even risk it. I think this is this is a
guy who I mean, he really wants to say
something where where without the style
getting in the way. He wants to use the
style to deepen the movie in a in a from
the standpoint of its its like the
humanity that it's earned
in terms of how it's forging some
relationship between us and these
characters um and the stakes for them.
And that to me feels like a corner got
turned for him.
>> I think you're right.
>> Okay, this is it. We're done.
>> Is there anything else I need to say?
>> I'm going to say goodbye to you.
>> Fantastic. Okay, Sean
>> Wesley,
>> thanks for coming and doing this.
>> Congrats on being you.
>> What's that mean?
>> It means you're the best.
>> Thank you. Congrats on being you, too.
Thanks for doing this. I appreciate it.
[Music]